---
layout: page
title: Introduction by Larry Silver
nav_order: 3
excerpt: An introduction explaining annotation methods and goals.
---

<p class="message">
**Lucas Cranach and the Woodcuts**

by Larry Silver

When called upon to discuss two of the most famous German artists of the
early sixteenth century, in his *Elements of Rhetoric* (1531) Philipp
Melanchthon, Luther\'s associate, compared Lucas Cranach (1472-1553) to
his contemporary Albrecht Dürer (1471-1528) in the following terms
regarding their graphic arts:

Dürer painted and engraved everything in the grand manner, with

differentiation in light and shade by more or less close hatching.

Lucas Cranach\'s pictures are spare, for all that they are
attractive.\"[^1]

Both the context and the observation are significant. For the *Passional
Christi and Antichristi* visual rhetoric was crucial, and the simpler
outline style of woodcut by Cranach was far better suited to the
pictorial clarity and effective communication than Dürer\'s intricate
graphic syntax, founded on the refined medium of engraving.

But Luther had other compelling reasons to turn to Lucas Cranach for
this important task of illustration, which marked a rhetorical
turning-point in his own publications\--the first pamphlet to include
significant imagery. Moreover, the *Passional* appeared at Luther\'s own
critical juncture of 1521, in the immediate wake of his interdict at
Worms and on the heels of his bridge-burning manifestos of 1520,
*Address to the Christian Nobility of the German Nation*, *The
Babylonian Captivity of the Church*, and *The Freedom of a Christian
Man.*

Lucas Cranach, the son of a painter in Franconia, basically followed his
father\'s profession throughout his long career.[^2] He made a formative
trip to Vienna in 1501-04, which resulted in his first dated pictures as
well as several portraits. But his first association with Wittenberg
followed soon after in 1505, when he was called by Frederick the Wise,
Luther\'s patron and Elector of Saxony, to serve as court artist. In
1508 he was granted a coat of arms with a winged, crowned serpent, used
as a signature on both paintings and prints thereafter. Many of his
early woodcut prints for the Elector bear the ducal coats of arms,
suggesting that they received approval from his patron or were even
sometimes direct commissions, though they also indicate the pride of the
artist in his court status. Cranach also experimented with the
techniques of woodcut, fashioning some of the earliest colored prints as
well as an early example of an expanded field in the form of a two-sheet
woodcut.[^3] And he had already anticipated the subject and imagery of
the *Passional* illustrations a decade earlier with his Passion cycle,
published as a series of fourteen sheets in Wittenberg, in 1509.

Among other tasks, Cranach decorated ducal residences and became a
favorite portraitist for noble families of the region. He also he built
up a large local workshop that allowed him to produce prodigious numbers
of paintings but also woodcut prints, including both religious works
(notably an illustrated guide to Frederick\'s renowned relics
collection) and court imagery, particularly tournaments and hunts. His
productivity allowed him to become wealthy, the owner of several houses
and an apothecary; he served on the city council of Wittenberg from 1519
to 1545, and was even elected burgomaster three times.

As both a printmaker and a painter, Cranach and his workshop produced
numerous portraits of Luther (later paired in pendant portraits with his
wife Katharina von Bora), Melanchthon, as well as Frederick the Wise and
his brother, John the Constant.

But Cranach and Luther had a more personal relationship. Cranach
established a publishing firm in 1523 that published several Reformation
pamphlets during its brief existence. Both men stood godfather to the
other\'s children. And of course, Cranach became one of the principal
formulators of both painted and printed images for the Lutheran creed.
His most notable Lutheran visual formula-came later in the same decade:
the contrasting of *Law versus Grace* (or *Law and the Gospel*;1529), in
both painted and printed versions, which uses the same antithetical
contrasts as the *Passional*.[^4]

Woodcut is a basic and collaborative graphic medium, which consists of
carving a wooden block around a drawn design so that the lines of the
design remain as ridges to print when inked, much like a modern rubber
stamp. The final carved block resembles the raised letters of movable
type used to print the lines of a book, and both can be printed from the
same press. Moreover, carving the wood-block requires specialized
talents and tools, especially to realize the ridges of fine lines of the
design, so woodcut artists almost inevitably collaborated with a carver
(German: *Formschneider*, or form-cutter; anonymous in the case of
Cranach) to produce their prints. Because of that collaboration in
production, facilitated through the organization of his own workshop,
Cranach could successfully translate his designs for woodcuts into print
illustrations in the series that accompanied the selected texts of the
*Passional.* Moreover, that same strong linear element, so basic to
woodcuts, made those *Passional* images both clear and effective on the
page\--\"spare\" or simple in the words of Melanchthon\--when paired
together with the lines of text. Thus besides personal connections in
Wittenberg, Cranach\'s earlier demonstrated mastery of the woodcut
illustration medium linked him to Luther as an ideal contributor to the
success of the *Passional Christi and Antichristi.*

Cranach\'s first major Reform print (1519) was far less successful
visually, overwhelming its pictorial elements with densely packed German
texts while providing a more complex, allegorical message in the
process. It was based on a program not by Luther, but by his Wittenberg
colleague and eventual rival, Andreas Bodenstein von Karlstadt, who
participated in a disputation in the city with Catholic advocate
Johannes Eck. In Luther\'s absence in 1522, Karlstadt pushed the Reform
theology further still, emphasizing destruction of images altogether, a
move stopped by Luther on his return in March of that year. But in 1519
Cranach\'s first affiliation with the new movement involved composing an
allegory of two opposing wagons, advancing in opposite directions, one
above the other.[^5] The upper wagon, carrying a pious layman, advances
leftward in eight segments toward a standing Christ with the cross.
Astride two of its horses in the team sit two guiding saints: Augustine
in his bishop\'s miter and Paul with a halo. Its message, based on
Augustine as interpreted by Luther, emphasizes submission to God\'s
will. In contrast, the lower wagon heads to the right toward the gaping
mouth of hell, already filled with naked sinners and devils. That cart
represents the scholastic theology of the Catholic Church and is guided
by a cleric, seated next to a devil, and asserting his own will (*eigner
wil*). The team of horses here is accompanied by \"good works.\" This
first significant Reform effort by Cranach marks his local collaboration
in Wittenberg with a program devised by a leading theologian; it uses
the same kind of visual antithesis, here between top and bottom, which
would fully shape his 1521 *Passional* woodcuts.

Cranach\'s increasing intimacy with Luther soon led him to generate one
of the other major pictorial types of the Reformation: portraits
celebrating the leaders of the new faith. Cranach would continue to
produce Luther portraits in bust length and full length for the rest of
his career, in both woodcut prints as well as small panel paintings, but
his first burst of imagery came at precisely the time of the
*Passional*, 1520-21.[^6] In most of his printed images, he insists on
the authenticity of the likeness, based on careful study from life, but
his Luther images, both engravings and woodcuts, also use Latin
inscriptions to defer to the superior written word over the portrait\'s
\"true likeness\" of the Reformer: \"Luther gave form to the eternal
likeness of his spirit; Lucas portrayed his mortal features.\"[^7] Yet
our pictorial image of Luther\'s features remain the artworks by his
friend Lucas Cranach.

Moreover, shortly after they worked together to compose the *Passional*,
Cranach had privileged access to Luther during his stay at the Wartburg
(1521-22), when he not only busily translated the New Testament into
German but also grew a beard and moved around in disguise for
self-preservation after his condemnation at Worms. As a German knight,
\"Junker Jörg,\" rather than in the monk\'s robes or doctor\'s cap of
his previous likenesses, Luther posed for both a painting and a woodcut
portrait (1522) by Cranach, before he finally returned to Wittenberg and
confronted Karlstadt.[^8] Cranach\'s images provide the essential
documentation of this significant moment in Luther\'s biography, all the
more poignant for its momentous connections to both the *Passional* and
Cranach\'s own emerging illustrations to Luther\'s new German Bible.

Luther began his translation of the New Testament at the Wartburg and
rapidly completed it, with editing assistance by Melanchthon, back in
Wittenberg in 1522. His goal was to have the printed work ready in time
for the Frankfurt book fair in September, so the initial print run has
become known as the \"September Testament.\"[^9] Cranach not only
designed illustrations, largely based on the prior woodcuts by Dürer for
his *Apocalypse* (1498), but he also worked in the physical production
of the volumes with Christian Döring on the presses of Melchior Lotter.
A revised edition swiftly appeared as the \"December Testament,\" the
first of many reprints of this cornerstone of the German language.
Cranach\'s twenty-one woodcut illustrations, using the same spare
simplicity admired by Melanchthon, featured aggressive additions made to
his Dürer model: a distinctly anti-papal iconography, particularly in
those woodcuts that show the papal triple tiara, variously worn by the
dragon in the temple (Rev. 11) and the beast (Rev. 16), as well as the
Whore of Babylon (Rev. 17); that inflammatory imagery, however, was
edited out in the December reprint at the request of Duke George of
Saxony.

Cranach\'s ultimate distillation of both his woodcut technique and the
emerging Lutheran message reappeared at the end of the decade of the
twenties in the theological formula known as Law and Grace, or Law and
the Gospel.[^10] This imagery derives from Luther\'s attempt to instruct
the faithful through devotional images and paintings (*andechtig bilder
und gemelde*). As in the *Passional* as well as in the September
Testament woodcuts, the simple outline figures convey a clear message;
here, too, as in both the Karlstadt *Wagon* allegory and the
*Passional*, the structure operates through antithesis, reading like the
*Passional* from left to right.

*Law and Grace* begins on the left, where a poor, naked sinner is driven
into the flames of Hell by the joint forces of Death and the Devil, as
Moses and other Old Testament prophets look on. Behind him Adam and Eve
commit their Original Sin, leading to the Last Judgment in the sky
above, which condemns all such sinful mortals to everlasting punishment.
The image is separated down the middle by a tree, whose leaves are dead
on the side of Law but abundant on the side of Grace. Then, the right
side unfolds as the only solution, through God\'s mercy, to that
otherwise inexorable divine judgment. Here, the sinner, guided by John
the Baptist, looks up at the cross; from the side wound of Jesus emerges
healing blood, descending to the prayerful human while accented by the
dove of the Holy Spirit and the sacrificial Lamb of God at the foot of
the cross. In the lower right corner, Christ rises from his cave-like
tomb, trampling in conquest upon the recumbent figures of Death and the
Devil with a banner of victory.. Thus Old Testament commandments are
redeemed through the sacrifice of the cross and the triumph of the
Resurrection.

*Law and Grace* sheds a revealing retrospective light on the *Passional
Christi and Antichristi*. It underscores the same left-right contrast of
antithesis, though in the earlier work the historical events of
Christ\'s life that begin the pairings on the left page give way to the
images of papal abuses and decadence, leading up to the culminating
image of the pope in Hell on the right.[^11] The decade of the twenties
refined Cranach\'s fine outline style and clarity of figures in his
woodcuts, from the *Passional* itself through the September Testament to
*Law and Grace.*

One aspect of the *Passional* that has not yet been noted is its
localization in the German present. Rather than situate the scenes from
the New Testament in a distant or exotic foreign setting, those woodcuts
deliberately insert evergreen trees and distant mountaintop castles,
characteristic of the Danube-style landscapes first produced by the
young Cranach but also indirectly alluding to the court setting of
Saxony, many of whose castles the artist placed in the backgrounds of
his paintings.[^12] The net effect of these choices is to make the
biblical scenes both Germanic and familiar, clear and simple to
understand, like the choice of the German language vernacular for the
biblical texts, in contrast to the foreign excesses (and even the
obscure and complex papal decretals and canon law, used ironically to
undermine papal claims).

The specific visual contrasts will be examined individually in the
images that follow, and the emerging theology of the pope as Antichrist
in the *Passional* will be elucidated in accompanying essays. But this
investigation has revealed what a crucial intervention\--visual,
theological, and biographical\--was forged for both parties in this
collaboration of 1521 between the artist Lucas Cranach and his friend
and patron in Wittenberg, the emerging Martin Luther.

[^1]: Jeffrey Ashcroft, ed. and transl. *Albrecht Dürer. Documentary
    Biography* (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2017), 942

[^2]: Foundational studies available in English on Cranach include Bodo
    Brinkmann, ed., *Cranach*, exh. cat. (London: Royal Academy, 2007);
    Werner Schade, *Cranach. A Family of Master Painters* (New York:
    Putnam\'s Sons, 1980). Also Steven Ozment, *The Serpent and the
    Lamb. Cranach, Luther and the Making of the Reformation* (New Haven:
    Yale University Press, 2011); Andrew Pettegree, *Brand Luther* (New
    York: Penguin, 2015), 148-63. On the *Passional* most recently Bobbi
    Dykema, *Luther, Cranach, and the Passional Christi und Antichristi*
    (Lambert: Saarbrücken, 2017).

[^3]: For Cranach\'s innovations in woodcut, David Landau and Peter
    Parshall, *The Renaissance Print 1470-1550* (New Haven: Yale
    University Press, 1994), 176-77, 183-98.

[^4]: Bonnie Noble, *Lucas Cranach the Elder: Art and Devotion of the
    German Reforma-tion* (Lanham, MD: University Press of America,
    2009), 27-66; Carl Christensen, *Art and the Reformation in Germany*
    (Athens, OH and Detroit: Ohio University Press and Wayne State
    University Press, 1979), 124-30; Werner Hoffmann, ed., *Luther und
    die Folgen für die Kunst*, exh. cat. (Hamburg: Kunsthalle, 1983),
    210-16, nos. 84-89.

[^5]: The lone surviving example is in Hamburg; Hoffmann, ed., *Luther
    und die Folgen*, 191-92, no. 65. This print would soon shape the
    imagery of a 1524 woodcut by Nuremberg artist Sebald Beham, *The
    Hell Journey of the Pope.* On Karlstadt, Pettegree, *Brand Luther*,
    101, 155, 192-95.

[^6]: Larry Silver, \"The Face is Familiar: German Renaissance Multiples
    in Prints and Medals,\" *Word and Image* 19 (2003), 6-21; Werner
    Hoffmann, ed., *Köpfe der Luther-zeit*, exh. cat. (Hamburg:
    Kunsthalle, 1983); Martin Warnke, *Cranachs Luther* (Frank-furt:
    Fischer, 1984).

[^7]: Hoffmann, *Köpfe der Lutherzeit*, 110-15, nos. 40-42; Henry
    Luttikhuizen, ed., *Stirring the World. German Printmaking in the
    Age of Luther*, exh. cat. (Grand Rapids: Calvin College, 2017),
    116-20, nos. 29-30. Compare Dürer\'s own desire to make a portrait
    of Luther, never fulfilled because that artist would never have made
    an image except from life: \"And if with God\'s help I should come
    to Dr Martinus Luther, I will use my skill to sketch his portrait
    and engrave it in copperplate as a lasting memorial of this
    Christian man, who has rescued me out of deep anguish.\" Letter to
    Georg Spalatin, 1520; Ashcroft, *Dürer Documentary*, 535. Dürer,
    however, did soon produce engraved portraits of Frederick the Wise
    (1524) and Philipp Melanchthon (1526) as well as Erasmus of
    Rotterdam (1526).

[^8]: Hoffmann, *Köpfe der Lutherzeit*, 116-17, no. 43; *Martin Luther.
    Treasures of the Reformation. Catalogue* (Minneapolis-New
    York-Atlanta, 2016), 204-05, no. 200. Latin text below reads: As
    much as I have been sought and pursued by you, Rome, see that I,
    Luther, still live through Christ. Jesus is my hope, and has not
    deceived me. As long as I have this, farewell, false Rome.\" Luther
    remained in the Wartburg from May 1521-March 1522, except for a
    December visit to Wittenberg.

[^9]: Pettegree, *Brand Luther*, 185-96; *Luther Treasures*, 209-10,
    nos. 205-208; Philipp Schmidt, *Die Illustration der Lutherbibel,
    1522-1700* (Basel: Reinhardt, 1977), 93-112..

[^10]: In addition to n. 4 above, see also *Luther Treasures*, 186-89,
    nos. 185-86. Painted versions from the Cranach workshop survive in
    Prague and Gotha.

[^11]: On the use of antithesis to contrast Catholic abuse with Lutheran
    simplicity, Bob Scribner, *For the Sake of Simple Folk. Popular
    Propaganda for the German Reforma-tion* (Oxford: Clarendon, 1994),
    esp. 148-89 on the *Passional* and Antichrist images.

[^12]: For Danube-style landscapes, chiefly the work of a younger
    Regensburg artist, Albrecht Altdorfer, Larry Silver, \"Forest
    Primeval: Albrecht Altdorfer and the German Wilderness Landscape,\"
    *Simiolus* 13 (1983), 5-43, where such settings provided the moral
    proving-grounds for spiritual crises; Christopher Wood, *Albrecht
    Altdorfer and the Origins of Landscape* (Chicago: University of
    Chicago Press, 1993). On Cranach\'s own painted castles, Matthias
    Müller, \"Architektonische Spurenlese in einter untergangenen
    Residenzlandschaft,\" in Elke Werner, ed., *Cranach und die Kunst
    der Renaissance unter den Hohenzollern*, exh. cat. (Berlin, 2009),
    99-109, esp. 106-09.

</p>

